---
layout: default
---

# Information on Meetings

## Teleconferences
* The Group organizes weekly teleconferences. See the [separate page](./webex) for the technical details on connecting to the calls.
* The Group also uses IRC for during the calls for minute taking, queue control, and general chit-chat. See the [separate page at W3C](https://www.w3.org/Project/IRC/) for further details. This Working Group uses the `#pwg` channel.

    The group makes also use of two bots on IRC:
    * [`zakim`](https://www.w3.org/2001/12/zakim-irc-bot.html) for queue control. (See the page for further details.)
    * [`rrsagent`](https://www.w3.org/2002/03/RRSAgent) and mainly, its adjacent [scribe script](https://dev.w3.org/2002/scribe/scribedoc.htm) for scribing and minute generation. (See those pages for further details.)
    * [`scribejs`](https://github.com/w3c/scribejs/blob/master/features.md) guidelines for scribes when using the `scribejs` minute generation tool (this is still experimental!)
        * To help the minute taking and cleaning them later, please use a consistent IRC handle; scribes should use that handle to identify the person speaking. The script cleaning up the minutes will automatically replace that handle with the personâ€™s full name, making the minutes more readable to outsiders.
    * *Each participant should type `present+ <name>` (or simply `present+` for himself/herself) in the irc channel immediately upon joining the call.* (This will help the minute taker and improve the generated minutes.)


## Upcoming F2F meetings

* [June 22-23, New-York, NY, USA](./F2F/2017.06.NYC)
* [November 6-7, Burlingame, CA, US](./F2F/2017.11.Burlingame)

## Meeting Minutes

Meeting minutes (both for F2F and telcos) are listed [separately](./Minutes/).
