---
layout: minutes
date: 2016-12-11
title: WG Teleconference — 2016-12-11
---
![W3C Logo](https://www.w3.org/Icons/w3c_home)
# Meeting: Permissions and Obligations Expression Working Group Teleconference — fake 2016 thing!
**Date:** 27 February 2017

See also the [Agenda]($headers.agenda) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2017/02/27-poe-irc.txt)
## Attendees
**Present:** renato, Serena, michaelS, benws_, CarolineB, ivan, Brian_Ulicny, simonstey, phila, victor, smyles

**Regrets:** Sabrina

**Guests:**

**Chair:** renato

**Scribe(s):** Serena
## Content:
* [1. F2F meeting in London](#section1)

---


> *benws_*: Sorry guys but I'll have to leave in 30 mins

> *renato*: https://www.w3.org/2017/02/13-poe-minutes.html

*(Serena)* **Proposed resolution: approve last meeting minutes**

> *renato*: https://www.w3.org/2016/poe/wiki/Deliverables

**renato:** we are collecting potential groups and individual to ask for review and feedback


> *renato*: https://www.w3.org/2016/poe/wiki/Email_Template

**renato:** the email template has been sent around
 is there anyone having comments on the text? I'd allow people to add issues on github directly should we set a deadline for the feedback?

**ivan:** we need to give them as much as time we can
 the F2F is mid-may so I'd say end of April and then two weeks to set most urgent issues by github and emails

**renato:** April 30th then


> *renato*: https://www.w3.org/2016/poe/wiki/Deliverables

**renato:** here there is the list of people


> *renato*: https://www.w3.org/2016/poe/charter#coordination

**phila:** W3C wide means several groups, I'll send the email to these groups


> *phila*: action: phila to contact groups listed at https://www.w3.org/2016/poe/charter#coordination

**phila:** the attention we need from internationalization is clear


> *simonstey*: a lot

**ivan:** do we have any property whose value is text?


> *simonstey*: all descriptions

**ivan:** then internationalization comes in


> *simonstey*: e.g. http://w3c.github.io/poe/vocab/#term-Assertion

**renato:** ODRL I'll take care of sending it, IPTC is up to Michael


**ivan:** for BSIG send an email to Bill


**renato:** the other contact persons are in the list. EDRLab - Michael. Is there any reasonable contact with CC?


> *renato*: https://www.w3.org/2002/09/wbs/33280/PandOE/results

**renato:** AC Review members
 what's the best way to handle this?

> *CarolineB*: I should be able to dig out someone from CC but at the policy rather than technical end. If htat's any help?

**phila:** anyone who showed an interest should be contacted


**renato:** any other group to be contacted?
 the second part is the actual horizontal review

> *simonstey*: https://www.w3.org/WAI/ER/tools/

**phila:** accessibility, I don't think there are issues here


**ivan:** in my experience it may happen that people in the accessibility group may comment on the accessibility of the documents


> *renato*: https://www.w3.org/International/techniques/developing-specs?collapse

**renato:** internationalization, there is a questionnaire
 do we simply fill in the questionnaire and then we send it to them, is that the process?

**ivan:** fill in the questionnaire and then contact them to tell that we did it


> *renato*: https://w3ctag.github.io/security-questionnaire/

**renato:** security, another questionnaire
 it seems there is not much for us is there any security guy here?

> *benws_*: Sorry guys - got to fly

> *simonstey*: +q

**renato:** there is privacy section and a security one


**simonstey:** the answers is what we put in the related section in our document


**phila:** we're not covering access control so these questions do not apply for us


**renato:** how do we proceed ?


> *renato*: http://gregnorc.github.io/ping-privacy-questions/

**renato:** I'll contact them
 privacy, we need to look at this in more details

> *renato*: https://www.w3.org/TR/activitystreams-core/#privacy

**renato:** the privacy questionnaire has to be answered and then look at them as a group and if we are satisfied with them we can send them.
 and that's it for the horizontal reviews questions or comments on the review process?

**renato:** we can move to other business


> *renato*: https://www.w3.org/2016/poe/track/actions/open

**renato:** there are a number of open actions
 please close the actions when you're done with it

> *phila*: -> https://www.w3.org/2016/poe/track/issues/raised Raised issues

**phila:** there are two raised issues at this stage and it's remarkable
 they're quite old

**renato:** we started raising issues on GitHub
 I have to have a look, I think that issue #11 is fine but issue #10 I'm not sure

> *simonstey*: issue-10

**renato:** we can move these two issues on Github to track them


### [1. F2F meeting in London](id:section1)

**renato:** do we have any logistics? Ben will provide more details soon.
 if you plan to come please add your name? we will look at the feedback we get and we will review the documents accordingly

**renato:** any other business for today's call?
 five days of meetings for some people rights management conference
