---
layout: minutes
date: 2017-04-23
title: WG Teleconference — 2017-04-23
---
# Meeting: Publishing Business Group fake date april 23 — and what is going on now?
***– DRAFT Minutes –***
{: .draft_notice}

**Date:** 2017-04-23

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-publishingbg/2017May/0059.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2017/04/23-pwg-irc.txt)
## Attendees
**Present:** Dave Cramer, Rick Johnson, Avneesh Singh, Mateus Teixeira, Ivan Herman, George Kerscher, Murata Makoto, Tzviya Siegman, Ric Wright, Bill Kasdorf, Cristina Mussinelli, Matt Garrish, Daniel Bennett, Liisa McCloy-Kelley, Jens Klingelhöfer, Liam Quin, Leslie Hulse, Garth Conboy, Junko Kamata, Julian Calderazi, Bill McCoy, Berhard Heinser, David Stroup

**Regrets:** Mike Baker, Nick Ruffilo, Greg Davis, Rachel Comerford, Paul Belfanti, Luc Audrain, Ryan Pugatch

**Guests:**

**Chair:** Rick

**Scribe(s):** Dave Cramer
## Content:
* [1. Charter](#section1)
* [2. update for EPUB Test](#section2)
* [3. EPUB for education](#section3)
* [4. EPUBCHECK](#section4)
* [5. November Publishing Summit](#section5)
* [6. Resolutions](#res)

---


> *Wolfgang Schindler:* hi everybody!

> *Wolfgang Schindler:* present + Wolfgang

> *Wolfgang Schindler:* good afternoon, Dave!

> *George Kerscher:* Hello folks

> *Wolfgang Schindler:* hi George!

**Rick Johnson:** we'll get started in a minute  

> *Garth Conboy:* present +Garth

**Rick Johnson:** let's get started  

### 1. Charter
{: #section1}

**Ivan Herman:** I should never be optimistic :)  
… the consultation with the AC is over  
… we have 52 votes in  
… all 52 votes said they want this work to be done  
… no objection to doing this work at all  
… it is 52; there were 35 who said they were interested in participating  
… 26 intend to develop projects or use the technology  
… the difficulty is that we have an IPR patent policy, which means lawyers look at these charters  
… so we have three objections saying we want this work to happen, but we want changes to the charter  
… I have to be vague, because not all comments are public  
… so the team is working on another version of the charter, to make it more palatable to lawyers  
… I saw the latest draft 10 minutes ago  
… there is nothing in those changes that really change what we want to do  
… it's all reformulating, making it more concise, making deliverables clearer  
… I hope this version will go out to those who formally objected  
… and see if this will work for them  
… I am cautiously nearly almost sort of optimistic  
… then we have to contact all 53 voters to see if they are ok with the new draft  
… they will get five business days to review  

> *George Kerscher:* Check if you are muted, because we are getting background noise.

**Ivan Herman:** if that works, then we are done  

**Rick Johnson:** we had talked two weeks ago about reaching out to those interested about the F2F meeting  

**Ivan Herman:** what the team came up with is that the June F2F is a joint meeting of the BG and the IG  
… this means anyone who is in the BG can come to this meeting  
… the BG has to decide if this is OK  
… then we can announce it that way  
… if, by then, the WG is operational, then the WG will ... find an administrative way of saying it's a WG meeting  
… the only reason we have to be careful is the same IPR issues  

> *Garth Conboy:* RVSP to F-to-F and draft agenda: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1J0VlZbMFj-33tfhZe0EK543NWFlx6dyDHauqkPwMeEI/edit#heading=h.6sesbeqec1qm](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1J0VlZbMFj-33tfhZe0EK543NWFlx6dyDHauqkPwMeEI/edit#heading=h.6sesbeqec1qm)

> *Garth Conboy:* Better: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1J0VlZbMFj-33tfhZe0EK543NWFlx6dyDHauqkPwMeEI/edit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1J0VlZbMFj-33tfhZe0EK543NWFlx6dyDHauqkPwMeEI/edit)

**Ivan Herman:** we have to play by the rules  
… there's no problem announcing it  
… I know that Wendy plans to reach out to you  
… you could tell Wendy if it's OK for this to be a BG/IG meeting  

**Rick Johnson:** people who show up create standards, so is it appropriate to call for objections to having the f2f be a BG/IG meeting?  
… does anyone have any objections to formally make the F2F a joint BG-IG meeting?  

**George Kerscher:** if this becomes a WG meeting  
… do WG members have to sign the IPR agreement in order to participate?  
… or is it automatic when you participate?  

**Ivan Herman:** the joining process--when the AC rep nominates someone to a group, it takes place then  

**Garth Conboy:** we want to make clear this is not a general BG meeting; I expect this to be much like a WG meeting  
… focused on PWP/WP/EPUB4  

**Rick Johnson:** my expectation is that we would use the facilities available now to announce the meeting  
… then update agenda to describe that it is, in fact, a WG meeting  

**Garth Conboy:** I pasted a link to the suggested agenda  
… that gives the flavor of what will happen  

**Bill Kasdorf:** is there an issue if someone that is in the BG that's not in the WG, travels to NYC, and is there a problem?  

**Ivan Herman:** no  

**Ivan Herman:** formally speaking, we can think of it as a BG/IG meeting. Let's not overthink this.  

**Bill Kasdorf:** that's what I was hoping you would say  

**Ivan Herman:** looking at the agenda, we should be careful to avoid issues that lead to IPR problems  

**Rick Johnson:** any objections? Any concerns about making this a joint meeting?  

> *Liisa McCloy-Kelley:* joint meeting +1

**George Kerscher:** just want to make sure it's a joint meeting between IG and BG that is working for plans for when the WG officially kicks off  

**Ivan Herman:** that's a wonderful formulation  

> ***Resolution #1: the June F2F is a joint meeting between the IG and the BG***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

**Rick Johnson:** I'll tell Wendy  

### 2. update for EPUB Test
{: #section2}

**Rick Johnson:** it looks like Brian isn't here  

**Bill Kasdorf:** I don't have anything; we should wait for Brian  

**Rick Johnson:** we'll postpone this item.  

**Rick Johnson:** I'll swap the next 2 items  

### 3. EPUB for education
{: #section3}

**Rick Johnson:** CG will work on part of this  
… I have committments from lots of publishers to work on this  
… my expectation is that within the next few weeks we can move formalize both the CG side and the IMS side  
… we at VitalSource will be proposing some specifics around the outcomes side  
… and we will volunteer to work with EPUBCHeck to support that  
… not sure what else we can do with EPUBCheck  
… we didn't have time to talk through the epub part last week  

### 4. EPUBCHECK
{: #section4}

**Rick Johnson:** we need resources  
… BillK and Liisa were champions for this  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://github.com/IDPF/epubcheck/wiki/WorkPlan](https://github.com/IDPF/epubcheck/wiki/WorkPlan)

**Rick Johnson:** does anyone has something to discuss around epubcheck, and how to keep it relevant and current  

**Bill Kasdorf:** Tzviya posted a link to the epubcheck work plan  

**Liisa McCloy-Kelley:** the big thing I want to figure out is  
… when and how do we get people to shift away from older versions of epubcheck  
… from a publishers perspective, the errors are different depending what version people are using  
… how do we deprecate older epubchecks?  

**Tzviya Siegman:** I'm not sure we can deprecate older versions  
… when epubcheck 4 was released, the old version is not really available for download  
… epubcheck can download older versions of EPUB  

**Liisa McCloy-Kelley:** I'm worried about retailers integrating older versions of epubcheck into their ingestion systems  

**Tzviya Siegman:** there's a lot of misunderstanding aobut epubcheck releases  

**Ric Wright:** i don't know how you get people to move on from an old version  
… Apple is using an old version which only checks 3.0, and so some people will want to us e that one  

**Garth Conboy:** we're guilty of running a 3.x version  
… it takes more than a month to integrate a new version into our system  
… this time we're going to push some changes back to epubcheck, to make integrations easier  
… it's hard to take a new version, whitelist new components, etc.  
… if we focus on making that easier, it could help  

**Rick Johnson:** do we know where epubcheck lives within w3c?  

**Bill McCoy:** the BG can create task forces  
… or it could be the CG  
… the code is on github  
… for "live" I think you mean who does what  
… some of the people doing the work might not be in the BG/CG/IG/WG  
… readium foundation has offered some help  
… we want to consider it as part of the publishing@w3c umbrella  
… or we could have another CG, but that might be too many groups  

**George Kerscher:** this relates to DAISY's planning for a11y checker  
… if someone gets a product out in the market that integrates these things  
… then if these components change there could be a problem  
… we need to figure out a way to figuring out what versions are being used, and then enable people to move to the next version  

**Rick Johnson:** I think they'll be something like epubcheck for whatever comes out of the WG  
… that will need to be part of the conversation  
… Bill, I need to turn back to you here. We need someone to take responsibility to drive this forward.  
… whether it's alignment with DAISY, with the CG, where's the best fit?  

**Bill McCoy:** from my POV, if the EPUB3 CG, was about to do 3.11, one of the plank for the plan for 3.11 would be tests and EPUBCheck  
… but we're behind the 8 ball, as we didn't do 3.1 in epubcheck before the merger  
… the unfinished business is that epubcheck is behind  
… that would be a good action item for me  
… but there's also a larger issue of epubcheck integration with the larger ecosystem  

> *Garth Conboy:* … epubchuck is hard, it’s real programming

> *Garth Conboy:* … often a problem for standards WG’s

> *Garth Conboy:* … unclear how we make that work with the volenteer nature of WG participation (and sometimes semi-technical)

**Dave Cramer:** epubcheck is production code, which is not a natural deliverable of a WG  

**Tzviya Siegman:** when I talk to Romain, he says it's hard to work on 'cause it's spaghetti code  
… if you look at that writeup, he's proposing an overhaul of the whole system  
… it's java-based, and even many of us who code don't know java  
… it's not just a wish-list, it's a matter of real time  

**Bill Kasdorf:** another thing we're lacking is a clear identity of who's the owner  
… the point person  
… I am not that person  
… because it was a collaborative effort between three organizations, it was never clear who was in charge  
… we need someone with public visibility to be the point person  

**Rick Johnson:** I'm going to jump the queue  
… Tzviya, you're writing in IRC, are you looking to be that person?  

**Tzviya Siegman:** I think we're confusing EPUB Test and EPUBCheck  

**Bill Kasdorf:** you're right, I was thinking about Test  

**Tzviya Siegman:** I'm offering to be the point person for EPUBcheck, but I can do none of the programming  

**Rick Johnson:** I think that's a great benefit, and I appreciate you taking that on  
… and helping figure out what needs to be done  

**Matt Garrish:** back to the CG question  
… one thing we failed in the past was listing all the changes between spec versions  
… I think that's something we should do going forward  
… it would be great to have a clear list of spec changes to work from  
… the CG can help with that  

**Avneesh Singh:** I want to clarify some things  
… EPUBCheck is not ready for open collaboration  
… it has been maintained by a small group  
… if you want it to be an open source process  
… first the software needs to be prepared for that  
… needs to be modular  
… the second thing is the business of running the project  
… the people who have worked on 3.1 are experts on formats/standards  
… but most are not hard core coders, and are not involved in open source  
… only readium is like that  
… maybe we need someone who's familiar with open=source development  

**George Kerscher:** I agree with Avneesh and delighted that Tzviya will be the point  
… the 3.1 support, digging into spaghetti code, and getting an update that will help us right now, is good  
… but for future, companies need to assign programmers to this, and commit time  
… the other approach is to put money into hiring someone  
… but we need nose-down programmers where this is part of their job description  
… it worked with Romain, but DAISY had to pull him off  

**Rick Johnson:** clarifying Q  
… there's only a small group of people who really understand the code?  
… and those people are working on the a11y checker?  
… and this a11y checker will have dependencies on EPUBCheck?  
… is that accurate?  

**George Kerscher:** we always thought epubcheck would run first  

**Rick Johnson:** if the a11y checker is expecting 3.1, and is expecting epubcheck to run first, there's a problem here  
… there seems to be a dependency on these people who are tied up  

**Avneesh Singh:** epub a11y spec is not tied to 3.1  
… we have a dependency, but its not do or die  
… for this year, Romain is fully tied up with a11y checker  
… we can not have epubcheck depend on one person anyway  

**Tzviya Siegman:** I think we're getting into too many details  
… I think we need a task force, and want Romain and TObias to intend  
… we need publishers to help, but we also need more information on what actual tasks are required  

> *Bill Kasdorf:* see why we needed Tzviya as point person? :-)

**Tzviya Siegman:** this is not a typical open-source project; it's large  

**Avneesh Singh:** Romain can help with consulting  

**Tzviya Siegman:** I'll work with Dave and Rachel to get this going in the CG, and get a task force  
… and break into modular tasks  

**Rick Johnson:** thanks  

**Ric Wright:** I do have experience managing open source, and it's very very difficult  
… it's harder than managing an internal team  
… I do know java, and was one of the original authors of epubcheck  
… so I could help the task force  
… and even work on epubcheck itself, but would need to be paid  

**Rick Johnson:** thanks everyone  
… two additions to the agenda  

### 5. November Publishing Summit
{: #section5}

**Bill Kasdorf:** I did agree to co-chair the program committe for the publishing summit in November  
… We need another co-chair  
… one of my priorities is related to the other topic, making sure it's not just books  
… I'd like to turn it over to you for a timeline, but there's a june 12 deadline for some things  
… perhaps we could have a call this week before I go to SSP  

**Bill McCoy:** this 1.5 day event co located with tpac is the big opportunity for making sure publishing @ w3c is not about just specs  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/2017/11/TPAC/Overview.html](https://www.w3.org/2017/11/TPAC/Overview.html) - note the warning about dreamforce

**Bill McCoy:** but about building a community  
… galvanizing the community, inspired by BiB, TOC, etc  
… we will open registration for TPAC week on June 12  
… so we need to be open for registration on June 12  
… we won't have a detailed program then  
… to Bill K's point, we need to validate and refine the theme  
… and turn that into a program outline  
… but we won't have specific sessions and speakers  
… so the work of the committee is a few calls etc before june 12, then some work in june/july to finalize program  
… then there's logistics, etc, which I and w3c can do  
… Bill_Kasdorf, do you want to supplement that?  

**Bill Kasdorf:** is the program committee involved in recruiting sponsors?  

**Bill McCoy:** from my POV, the primary responsibility is the program, not finding sponsors  

**Bill Kasdorf:** this is a short-term commitment to shaping the program, finalizing the program and title for June 12, then shaping the program by end of July  

**Bill McCoy:** correct. There's already a start on the wiki  

**Rick Johnson:** Question: how should volunteers contact you?  

**Bill Kasdorf:** email me and sign up on the wiki  

**Bill McCoy:** given your schedule, we should have a call thursday or friday  

**Bill Kasdorf:** could you do a doodle poll to whoever's interested today?  

> *George Kerscher:* bye

**Rick Johnson:** we had one other agenda item, on reaching out to non-publishers, but I'll add that to the agenda for the next meeting  
… this is our meeting; if there are things you want to discuss let me know.  

**Rick Johnson:** thanks everyone! we're done.  

---


### 6. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1: the June F2F is a joint meeting between the IG and the BG](#resolution1)
